.\" abquot isom.d/man/man1 file abquot.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH abquot 1 "27 January 1994" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
abquot \- find the abelian invariant factors of a finitely presented group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B abquot [
.I gpname
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B abquot
reads either from 
.I gpname,
or from standard input if no file is specified.
Output is to 
.I gpname\fP.abquot
in the first case, to standard output in the second.
In either case, input should conform to the Geometry Group standard
format, and should contain a list of generators and relators for a group,
.I G.
The relators are first abelianized and written additively, and then
reordered as in
.B ordrels(1),
so that the relators that only involve the first
.I i
generators precede the others, for all relevant
.I i.
Since the abelianization process may result in some generators disappearing
from some relators, this may result in a different order from that produced
by
.B ordrels.
The
.I relinvolve
sequence for the relators is computed as in
.B ordrels.
The order of the generators is not changed, but only the first of each
generator-inverse pair is kept.
.PP
The orders of the cyclic invariant factors of the resulting abelianized group
\fIG\fP/[\fIG\fP,\fIG\fP] are then computed, together with the map of the
generators of
.I G
onto these factors. The generators of the infinite cyclic factors are chosen
so as to make the matrix of this map onto these factors is lower triangular.
.PP
As is the case with
.B ordrels(1),
the output of this program is designed to be used by the program
.B findisoms(1).
It is not intended for use with large presentations. The program
.B subabquot(1),
is more suitable for this purpose.
.PP
The input must occur in the following order.
.br
(i) Generators, given as a list of gens (or words).
This defines the order of the generators.
.br
(ii) (Optional) Table of inverses.
If the inverse of a generator
.I g
is not given explicitly, then
it will be put equal to
.I g^-1
by default and, if
.I g^-1
was not present
in the list of generators, then it will be inserted immediately after
.I g.
Of course the inverse of
.I g^-1
will be
.I g.
(If, however,
.I g*g
is later discovered in the list of relators, then the inverse of
.I g
will be redefined to be
.I g.
) Alternatively, if the line
.IP
.nf
inverses {case_change}
.fi
.PP
is present in the input, then all generators must be single letters, and
inverses will be defined by case change (i.e. inv(\fIg\fP) = \fIG\fP).
.br
(iii) List of relators.
.br
.PP
The output, which is written to standard output, is as follows.
.br
(i) The list of generators, with order unchanged, but only the first of
each generator-inverse pair included, given in an
.I abgens
section.
.br
(ii) The reordered list of abelianized relators in additive notation,
given in an
.I abrels
section.
.br
(iii) A
.I abrelinvolve
section containing the corresponding relinvolve sequence.
.br
(iv) The orders of the cyclic invariant factors of the abelianized group
(with infinite factors denoted by 0), given in an
.I abinvariants
section.
.br
(v) The images of the generators of the group in these invariant factors,
given in an
.I abimages
section.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B ordrels(1)
.br
.B findisoms(1)
.br
.B subabquot(1)
.br
.B ``Data Exchange for Automatic Groups''
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is 0 if successful and 2 otherwise.
