.\" convrep isom.d/man/man1 file convrep.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH convrep 1 "27 January 1994" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
convrep \- compute a different permutation representation of a permutation group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B convrep
[
.B \-m
maxopdeg
]
permgpname
[
.I inf1
]
[
.I inf2
]
[
.I outf
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B convrep
takes input from the files
.I permgpname,
.I permgpname.inf1,
and
.I permgpname.inf2,
and outputs to
.I permgpname.outf.
(Default values for
.I inf1, inf2
and
.I outf
are sg, \-t and reg, respectively.)
.I permgpname
should contain generators for a permutation group
.I P,
( as output by
.B permim(1),
.B lowindex(1),
or
.B subpquot(1),
.B subabquot(1),
or
.B lcs(1)
with the
.B \-p
option, for example).
.I permgpname.inf1
should contain a base and strong generating set for the same group.
This will normally be the output of
.B sg(1)
applied to
.I permgpname.
.I permgpname.inf2
should contain a base (the same base) and strong generating set for a subgroup
.I Q
of
.I P,
but if 
.B \-t
is used for
.I inf2,
then the trivial subgroup will be used. (In fact, since there are currently
no facilities for defining subgroups of permutation groups,
.B \-t
will normally be used here, and
.B \-t
is the default for
.I inf2.)
.PP
.B convrep
converts the permutations in
.I permgpname
to their representation on the cosets of the subgroup
.I Q
and,
provided that the degree of this representation is not greater than
.I maxopdeg
(default is 9999),
it outputs to
.I permgpname.outf.
Thus, if
.B \-t
is used for
.I inf2,
then they are converted to their action in the regular permutation
representation.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-m
.I m.
.br
Set the value of
.I maxopdeg
equal to
.I m.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B permim(1)
.br
.B lowindex(1)
.br
.B subpquot(1)
.br
.B subabquot(1)
.br
.B lcs(1)
.br
.B sg(1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is 0 if successful and 2 otherwise.
