.\" lcs isom.d/man/man1 file lcs.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH lcs 1 "27 January 1994" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
lcs \- compute the lower p-central series of a finitely presented group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lcs
.B \-p
.I prime
.B \-c
.I maxclass
[
.B \-e
.I exponent
] [
.B \-f
] [
.B \-t
.I maxtime
]
.I gpname
[
.B \-s
.I permrep
] [
.B \-p
] [
.B \-m
maxopdeg
] [
.B \-a
] [
.B \-md
.I maxopdim
] [
.B \-e
suffix
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lcs
is merely a filter which calls up code written by Eamonn O'Brien in Canberra.
The principal algorithm used is
often known as the nilpotent quotient algorithm or, more recently, the
p-quotient algorithm.
It computes the quotients
.I X/X\fP(\fIc\fP)
of the lower p-central series of a finitely presented group
.I X
for
.I c
going from 1 down to class
.I maxclass,
modulo a fixed prime
.I p.
The prime and
.I maxclass
must be entered on the command-line, using the
.B \-p
and
.B \-c
options, respectively.
Some related permutation and matrix group actions can also be calculated.
(If the p-quotient is only required to class 1, then the program
.B subpquot(1)
is likely to be more efficient, and should be used instead.)
The file
.I gpname
should contain a presentation of a finitely presented group
.I G.
In its basic form,
.B lcs
takes its input from this file, and calculates the \fIp\fP-quotients of the
group
.I G.
If the
.B \-s
.I permrep
option is called, however, then it is assumed that the file
.I gpname.permrep
contains a transitive permutation representation of
.I G
on the right cosets of a subgroup
.I H,
and that
.br
.B subgp
.I permrep
.br
has previously been run, to create a presentation of
.I H
in the file
.I gpname.permrep\fPsubgp.
In this case,
.B lcs
takes its input from this file, and calculates the \fIp\fP-quotients of the
group
.I H.
.PP
If the lower p-central series becomes constant for class
.I c
less than
.I maxclass,
then a message to that effect is written to stdout.
If the optional argument
.B \-e
.I exponent
is used, then extra relations will be enforced on the quotients to make them
have exponent dividing
.I exponent.
Note that
.I exponent
= 0 is equivalent to the default, which is unbounded exponent.
Otherwise,
.I exponent
must be a power of the prime
.I p,
or the program will crash.
.PP
For each
.I c
from 1 to
.I maxclass,
a power-commutator presentation of the quotient of
.I G
or
.I H
at class
.I c
together with the images of the group generators in terms of the
pcp-generators is output to the file \fIgpname\fP.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fP
or \fIgpname.permrep\fPsubgp.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fP
(where
.I e
=
.I exponent).
(Note that the
.I e
component of these filenames is always present - if no exponent is specified,
then the default is
.I e
= 0.)
.PP
If the
.B \-p
option (after the group name) is called, then, provided the degree is not
greater than
.I maxopdeg
(9999 by default), the permutation representation of
.I G
on the right cosets of the subgroup
G(\fIc\fP)
or
H(\fIc\fP)
is output to the file
\fIgpname\fP.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fPp
or \fIgpname.permrep\fPsubgp.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fPp.
.PP
If the
.B \-a
option is called, then,
provided that the dimension is not greater than
.I maxopdim
(299 by default), the action of the generators of
.I gpname
on the elementary abelian section
.I G\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIG\fP(\fIc\fP)
or
.I H\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIH\fP(\fIc\fP)
are computed and output as a list
of matrices (one for each generator) to the file
\fIgpname\fP.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fPa
or \fIgpname.permrep\fPsubgp.lcs\fIp\fP,\fIc\fP,\fIe\fPa.
In the second case, this is only meaningful if the subgroup
.I H
is normal in
.I G
or, equivalently, if the permutation representation
in
.I gpname.permrep
is regular. The quotient modules of this matrix group can later be
computed with the Meataxe programs (see
.B meataxe(1)),
preceded by the filter
.B mat2ma(1).
It is then possible to run
.B lcs
again with the
.B \-e
option (after the group name),
and output permutation representations of the quotients
\fIG\fP/\fIL\fP, where
.I L
is a normal subgroup of
.I G
corresponding to a submodule of
.I G\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIG\fP(\fIc\fP)
or
.I H\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIH\fP(\fIc\fP).
.PP
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-p
.I prime.
.br
Set the value of the prime
.I p.
.IP \fB\-c
.I maxclass
.br
Set the maximum class for p-quotient computation.
.IP \fB\-e
.I exponent.
.br
Set the value of the exponent.
.IP \fB\-f
Look for the output of a previous run of
.B lcs
at some class
.I c,
and continue from class
.I c\fP+1.
.IP \fB\-t
.I maxtime
.br
Stop and give up (with a message to stderr) after
.I maxtime
seconds have elapsed.
.IP
All of the preceding options must occur before the
.I gpname
argument. If called, the following option must occur immediately after
.I gpname,
and the remaining options after that.
.IP \fB\-s
.I permrep
.br
Calculate abelian invariants of a subgroup
.I H
rather than
.I G
itself. See above.
.IP \fB\-p
.I oprep
.br
Output permutation representations to the file
.I gpname.oprep,
as described above.
.IP \fB\-m
.I maxopdeg
.br
Set the largest degree for which permutation representations can be output to
.I maxopdeg
(9999 by default).
.IP \fB\-a
(For normal subgroups only.) To use this option,
.br
.B subgp
.I iprep
.br
must have been run with the
.B \-a
option.
Output the conjugation action of the
generators of
.I G
on those of
.I H
as matrices over the field of order
.I p,
as described above.
.IP \fB\-md
.I maxopdim
.br
Set the largest dimension for which matrix representations can be output to
.I maxopdim
(299 by default).
.IP \fB\-e
.I suffix
.br
Read generators of a submodule of
.I G\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIG\fP(\fIc\fP)
or
.I H\fP(\fIc-1\fP)/\fIH\fP(\fIc\fP)
(in Meataxe format)
from the file
.I gpname.suffix,
compute the quotient of
.I G
by this submodule, and output the corresponding permutation representation.
(This option should only be used together with the
.B \-p
option after the group name.)
.SH SEE ALSO
.B subgp(1)
.br
.B mat2ma(1)
.br
.B meataxe(1)
.br
.B subpquot(1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is normally 0, even if the program exits through lack of time or
space. It is 2 if the command-line is wrong, or if there is an error in
reading the input files or data.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This program invokes Eamonn O'Brien's Canberra implementation of the
p-quotient algorithm.
