.\" lowindex isom.d/man/man1 file lowindex.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH lowindex 1 "28 January 1994" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
lowindex \- find  subgroups of low index in a finitely presented group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lowindex
[
.B \-m
.I maxindex
]
[
.B \-n
.I maxsubs
]
[
.B \-t
.I maxtime
]
.I gpname
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B lowindex
is merely a filter which calls up code written by Martin Schoenert in Aachen.
It takes input from the file
.I gpname,
or from
.I gpname\fP.ordrels
if the latter file is present,
which should contain a finite presentation of a group
.I G.
It is recommended that
.br
.B ordrels
.I gpname
.br
be run before running
.B lowindex,
because this usually results in
.B lowindex running more efficiently.
.B lowindex finds all conjugacy classes of subgroups of
.I G
of index at most
.I maxindex,
which is equal to 10 by default.
The output consists of the permutation representations of
.I G
on the right cosets of the subgroups found, one file for each subgroup.
The files are named
\fIgpname.\fPli_permim\fIn\fP, for
.I n
= 1,2,3,... .
The order of permutations output is as in the file
.I gpname
and not as in
.I gpname\fP.ordrels,
in order to maintain compatibility with other programs.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-m\fP
.I maxind
Find all subgroups up to index
.I maxind
(10 by default).
.IP \fB\-n\fP
.I maxsubs
.br
Stop if more than
.I
maxsubs subgroups are found.
.IP \fB\-t
.I maxtime
.br
Stop (and give up, writing a message to stderr) after
.I maxtime
seconds.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B permim(1)
.br
.B ordrels(1)
.br
.B quotpic(1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is normally 0, even if the program exits through lack of time or
space. It is 2 if the command-line is wrong, or if there is an error in
reading the input files or data.
.SH ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This program invokes Martin Schoenert's Aachen implementation of the
low index subgroup algorithm.
