.\" mat2ma isom.d/man/man1 file mat2ma.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH mat2ma 1 "31 August 1992" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
mat2ma \- try to find two generators for a permutation group, and convert
the corresponding matrices in a matrix representation to Meataxe format.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mat2ma
[
.B \-p
.I prime
]
[
.B \-c
.I class
]
[
.B \-e
.I exponent
]
.I gpname permrep
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mat2ma
takes input from the file
.I gpname.permrep,
which contains a permutation represention of the finitely presented group
defined in
.I gpname.
It also takes input from the file
.I gpname.permrep\fPsubpquot\fIprime
by default, or from
.I gpname.permrep\fPsubgp.lcs\fIprime,class,exponent\fP
if the
.B \-c
option is used.
(But if
.I permrep
is set equal to
.B -t
for the trivial permutation representation, then the
.B lcs
output file will be
.I gpname.lcs\fIprime,class,exponent\fP.)
It reads the matrices from this file, which define the action of the
generators of the permutation group in
.I gpname.permrep
on the corresponding module over the field of order
.I prime.
.B mat2ma
attempts to find two generators of this permution group. If it fails, it gives
up with a message to stderr. If it succeeds, then it computes the matrices
corresponding to these two generators and outputs their transposes
in Meataxe format to the files
.I gpname\fP.ma.a1 and
.I gpname\fP.ma.a2.
The Meataxe programs (see
.B meataxe(1))
can then be used to compute the submodules of this module.
Since we transposed the matrices before outputting them, it is in fact
computing the quotient modules of the original module.
.B subpquot(1)
or
.B lcs(1)
can then be run again to compute permutation representations of the
corresponding quotients
of the original finitely presented group.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-p
.I prime
.br
Set the prime involved equal to
.I prime.
If this option is not used, then the program will prompt interactively for
.I prime.
.IP \fB\-c
.I class
.br
Input the matrices from the output of a run of
.B lcs(1)
at class
.I class,
as described above.
.IP \fB\-e
.I exponent
.br
In case of output from a run of
.B lcs(1),
set the exponent equal to
.I exponent
(the default is 0).
.SH SEE ALSO
.B subpquot(1)
.br
.B lcs(1)
.br
.B meataxe(1)
.br
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is 0 if successful or if two generating permutations cannot
be found, and 2 otherwise.
