.\" sg isom.d/man/man1 file sg.1
.\" @(#)date.1v 1.11 88/02/25 SMI;
.TH sg 1 "31 August 1992" "Geometry Group" "Geometry Group's manual"
.SH NAME
sg \- compute a base and strong generating set for a permutation group
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sg
[
.B \-b
]
[
.B \-ib
]
[
.B \-pg
]
[
.I permgpname
]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B sg
takes input from the file
.I permgpname
(or
\fIpermgpname.\fPpgens
if the
.B \-pg
option is used)
if this is specified,
and from standard input otherwise.
Output is to the file
.I permgpname.\fPsg
in the first case and to standard output in the second.
The input should contain the generators of a permutation group
(as output by
.B permim(1),
.B lowindex(1),
or
.B subpquot(1),
.B subabquot(1)
or
.B lcs(1)
with the
.B \-p
option, for example).
The output contains a base, list of basic orbit lengths,
and set of strong generators
for the same permutation group. This can be used as the target permutation
group in a run of 
.B permim(1),
if 
.I permgpname.\fPsg
is not present in the database of permutation groups.
It can also be used by
.B convrep(1)
to convert to a different permutation representation of the group.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP \fB\-b
Read a base from the input file, and assume that this is a base.
.IP \fB\-ib
Write the base that is computed into the original file
.IP \fB\-pg
Take input from
\fIpermgpname.\fPpgens
rather than
.I permgpname.
This is mainly there to allow a user of
.B quotpic(1)
to input a personal permutation group.
.SH SEE ALSO
.B permim(1)
.br
.B lowindex(1)
.br
.B subpquot(1)
.br
.B subabquot(1)
.br
.B lcs(1)
.br
.B convrep(1)
.br
.B quotpic(1)
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Exit code is 0 if successful and 2 otherwise.
